DOC-910: Create community question about shifts (#7202)
deephaven/deephaven-core: docs/groovy/conceptual/positional-index-safety.md

---
title: Positional indices
---

When working with Deephaven tables, you may encounter positional indices (`i`, `ii`) and row keys (`k`) in formulas. Understanding when these are safe to use is crucial for avoiding incorrect results and runtime errors.

## The fundamental rule

> **Positional indices (`i`, `ii`, `k`) and column array variables are unsafe on refreshing tables** and will cause `IllegalArgumentException` errors by default. The engine blocks these formulas to prevent incorrect results.

Reviewer: This is inaccurate. You can do:

```python
tt = time_table("PT1s").update("X = ii")
```

and no error is raised, despite it being a refreshing table.

- **`i`** and **`ii`** are positional indices that represent the current ordinal position of a row within a table.
- **`k`** is the row key, a unique identifier for each row that may differ from positional index.
- **Column array variables** allow direct access to column data arrays, which become invalid when table structure changes.

## Key terms

Before diving into the details, let's define the key concepts:

> - **Row key (`k`)**: A unique identifier assigned to each row in a table. Row keys are used internally by the engine to track rows and are typically sequential integers starting from 0.

Reviewer: Check accuracy on the second half of this statement.

> - **Positional index (`i`)**: The current position of a row within a table, starting from 0 for the first row. Unlike row keys, positional indices always reflect the current order of rows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Positional index (`i` and `ii`)**: The current position of a row within a table, starting from 0 for the first row. Unlike row keys, positional indices always reflect the current order of rows.
```

> - **Shifts**: When a table grows beyond its pre-allocated row key space, the engine may need to move (shift) other tables' rows to new row key positions to make room. The row data itself doesn't change, but the row keys do.

Reviewer: other tables?

> - **Constituent tables**: The individual tables that are being merged together. Each constituent table gets its own allocated range of row keys in the merged result.

Reviewer: IIRC, Charles mentioned that shifts happen in more than just merges. This is also the first time in this guide that "merge" gets used, which caught me off guard.

- **Row key slots**: Pre-allocated ranges of row keys reserved for each constituent table. For example, table A might get slots 0-4095, while table B gets slots 4096-8191.

> - **Refreshing tables**: Tables that can change over time (live data). This includes tables created from live data sources (like `timeTable`, Kafka streams, database connections), tables that are the result of operations on refreshing tables, and any table where rows can be added, removed, or shifted after creation. In contrast, **static tables** never change after creation - they contain fixed data that remains constant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Refreshing tables**: Tables that can change over time (live data). This includes tables created from live data sources (like `timeTable`, Kafka streams, etc.), tables that are the result of operations on refreshing tables, and any table where rows can be added, removed, or shifted after creation. In contrast, **static tables** never change after creation - they contain fixed data that remains constant.
```

Also, consider an indented bulleted list for every item in the second sentence. It's very long as-is.

- **Append-only tables**: A special type of refreshing table where new rows are only added at the end (never inserted, moved, or deleted), making positional indices safe to use.

## Why positional indices become unsafe

When a refreshing table changes, several things can happen that make positional indices incorrect:

### 1. Row additions

When new rows are added to a table, the positional indices of existing rows may change. Consider this example:

> ```groovy order=null

Reviewer: I tested the equivalent Python code block and it worked just fine with the second part un-commented.

// Start with a simple live table
liveTable = timeTable("PT1s").update("value = randomInt(1, 100)")

// If we could add a positional index formula (this would fail):
// indexedTable = liveTable.update("position = i", "indexed_value = value + i")
```

**The problem:** As new rows are added every second, existing rows' positional indices shift:

- At T=0: Row with `value=50` is at `i=0`, so `indexed_value` would be `50 + 0 = 50`

> - At T=1: New row added at top, previous row moves to `i=1`, but `indexed_value` stays `50`

Reviewer: A new row is not added at the top, it's added at the bottom. It's only added at the top if you reverse it.

- At T=2: Previous row now at `i=2`, but `indexed_value` still shows `50` instead of `52`

### 2. Row removals

When rows are removed, positional indices of remaining rows change. Here's a concrete example:

> ```groovy order=null

Reviewer: Like the code block above it, this runs just fine even if you un-comment the last line.
